jane mayer is a highly awarded writer
for The New Yorker several books on
money elections the war on terror and
American government her best-selling
book dark money traces the murky depths
of right-wing donor class funding the
rise of extreme conservative agenda she
will be in conversation today with rob
rice mr. rice is a professor of
political science at Stanford University
and the faculty coordinator of the
Stanford center on Philanthropy and
civil society his new book JustGiving
why philanthropy is failing democracy
and how it can do that is a look into
how we may need to reconsider some
shared beliefs about the role of
philanthropy in a Democratic Society
mr. rice examines large inequities
within the world of giving and how both
big and small charities can fail the
causes that they claim to celebrate mr.
rage discusses ways forward in
addressing charities that can provide
necessary access to public goods rather
than influence policy in favor of the
wealthy please join me in welcoming Jane
and Rob to politics and prose thanks to
all of you for coming thanks so much
welcome everybody it's great that
everybody came out on such a freezing
night so Rob this book you know people
sometimes accuse critics of criticizing
things that are like you know motherhood
and apple pie and you have criticized
the PTA in America here I think that
even goes beyond motherhood it's kind of
a combination of motherhood and apple
pie so I guess I wondered people think
of philanthropy as something that's an
unalloyed good people doing good what
possessed you to write this book yeah
the PTA figures into this so the its
first of all correct that I am
attempting to provide a critical
framework and through that framework
criticism philanthropy something that
does ordinarily come across as a neatly
good especially if what you're comparing
it to is the alternative of someone not
giving money away at all and just buying
more stuff of their own surely any
philanthropy no matter
how it turns out is preferable the
thought goes to just keeping more money
for yourself and indeed that's what I
want to criticize in the book that basic
view and it starts with the PTA so you
know around 10 years ago I packed off my
oldest Jill to the public school system
in Palo Alto California my guess is that
there's a similar phenomenon out here
not really with sending to get some
public school but about what I'm about
to say on the first day of kindergarten
my son came home from school with a
whole bunch of pamphlets and things from
the school district
you know extolling the virtues of the
public schools in Palo Alto and a glossy
form that said that year my expected but
voluntary contribution to the Palo Alto
school system was $2,000 per child and
as a parent I sort of fell up out of my
seat and then as a scholar I thought to
myself as someone who'd been writing
about education and education finance I
would try now to collect a bunch of data
on the phenomenon of private giving to
public schools often championed through
the PTA or PTO which had been converted
from holding bake sales and spaghetti
dinners into holding glossy auctions
that raised thousands and thousands of
dollars per child at least in the Bay
Area and the common sense intuition in
fact is borne out that wealthy suburbs
can raise a lot of money per kid and
poor places like East Palo Alto can't or
big cities like San Jose Oakland San
Francisco don't on top of it I found
then that giving to the PTA or giving to
the local school foundation counts
legally speaking as a charitable
contribution so you're giving to a 501 C
3 public charity so there were tax
advantages before you're giving to your
own kids public school so I had in front
of me an example of what seemed to me a
charitable act that was heaping further
advantage on already relatively
advantaged kids and parents and that was
subsidized by the rest of the country in
the form of foregone tax revenue so that
all of us as citizens are subsidizing
the worsening of an inequality that I
thought some government agent was
responsible for addressing in the first
place here's a
already in my mind it's something to do
with alms giving assistance of the poor
combating disadvantaged private giving
the public schools is basically the
inverse of all of those things it's rich
people helping basically rich children
heaping additional advantage on the
people are already advantaged and doing
so with a subsidy from the rest of us
for the entire process and on top of it
calling it a noble and civic tact which
I want to add at the end here I think I
don't mean to demean that impulse I
think in their heads it is a good thing
to do I don't think they're necessarily
aware of how little charity goes to
serve the poor the disadvantaged and
then that led me into a much bigger
project if this was going on the PTA
what's the rest of charity look like why
do we have tax deductions and what the
hell is a 501c3 where'd that come from
so the book aims to examine these public
policy choices that the United States
and then in some other countries have
made to try to structure the universal
impulse to give money away so just to go
on with the the first example that
caught your attention what would be the
alternative if there was no tax
deduction and parents did not I were not
encouraged to give to private schools or
public schools I mean private schools in
a way or even more a matter of sort of
no it's not but I mean if you take a
look at some of the most prestigious
private schools in the country st.
Paul's or Exeter and Andover they've got
libraries that are nicer than any you'll
see except on college campuses basically
they have nice libraries too so so so
what I mean what so what is the argument
is it that there should you know what
would be the alternative would you look
rather that people feel the pinch in
this country of what it would be like if
there is no extra funding for those
public schools then the then yeah
governments would have to actually pay
for everybody to get better equipped
schools is that what you there's there's
three thoughts and I'll keep this really
short so one is in the direction that
you're you're suggesting namely that you
know when I went out and talked to
people who give a lot of money
to support the public school they'll say
often correctly well if Sacramento
actually had its act together and funded
the schools in California in a way that
was appropriate then we wouldn't need to
do all this philanthropic fundraising
but since Sacramento screwed up we we
have to do this so the thought is in the
absence of having this permission to
give money parents might be relatively
speaking more likely to attack the root
source of the problem so you get the
savviest and most politically able
parents in all of California directed
through their social circle to support
the school auction and do better by
their own kids in the public school
system rather than heading off to
Sacramento to champion change at the
appropriate level appropriate meaning it
would solve the problem for all students
so that's one thought a second thought
would be well I have a tax deduction for
giving to a relatively speaking wealthy
public school what if we just got rid of
that if you want to make a contribution
to your I'm gets public school do it on
your own dime don't expect a subsidy for
it but even on top of that and this is
what I sort of contemplated in the book
I discovered that there are certain
types of giving people often say
philanthropy is the best example of the
voluntary expression of the liberty of a
person to do what they want with their
own money but there are certain types of
giving that are actually blocked
independent of a tax incentive there are
certain things you can't give to the
example I give in the book about that is
imagine if instead of your public school
you were blocking whatever neighborhood
you live in here in the DC area the
budget of the city was cut there was a
crime wave you thought that a bolstering
the police force would be the right way
to attack a crime wave you try to go to
the mayor the City Council get no
response and so instead you and your
neighbors get together and you say we'll
offer a charitable contribution a
private donation to the City Police
Department to hire an additional officer
whose only patrol will it be your block
you say this will free up additional
resources for the police department and
you call it a charitable act you're
trying to help other people around you
who might not be able to make this
contribution in actual fact the DC
police will send that donation back to
you because you don't have the
permission with private dollars to
direct the public agencies operation
now evidently that's true with public
schools but not true with the police so
there are places where we want to block
the ability of people to give money even
when we acknowledge the money is theirs
so we generally I mean I know from
having been a critic of for instance
when I was looking at how the Koch
brothers gave their money we we you you
encounter a lot of resistance when
you're critical of giving money away
right and and for sort of obvious
reasons but this it wasn't always true
was it in American history you know that
everybody thought it was a wonderful
thing for the rich to be able to set up
private foundations yeah how did this
all start right so when I got interested
in this topic I went to try to learn
something of the history of the
philanthropy the United States and
particularly policy structures where did
we get the private foundation from
that's the sort of unusual corporate
form and the story that goes back to the
first field adage in the United States
and the era of the Rockefellers and the
Carnegie's so I discovered that when
john d rockefeller who would have massed
the largest fortune at that time if
anyone ever in the united states wanted
to create a general purpose foundation a
philanthropic entity to steward his is
giving he went off to the US Congress to
asked for a bill that would incorporate
the Rockefeller Foundation with this
global national and local scope and a
very general mission you know whatever
is now to support humanity or humankind
and instead of getting a celebratory
reception for his philanthropic impulse
he arrived in DC and got stiff criticism
the idea of a wealthy person who had
announced himself as now wanting to take
his mountain of money and have a public
influence by using his private assets to
change public policy or to decide what
public benefits great was not met with
gratitude but was met with criticism so
I'll just share with you one or two
passages because they're so potent and
we're so unfamiliar to hear today so in
Rockefeller showed up in in in DC in
1912 the sitting US president said the
followings this is Taft Taft said
the bill is nothing less than a bill to
incorporate mr. Rockefeller himself the
former US President Roosevelt Teddy
Roosevelt said no amount of charity and
spending such a fortune can compensate
in any way for the initial misconduct
and acquiring them president of the
American Federation of Labor Samuel
Gompers of course Rockefeller had been
engaged in various forms of union
busting with Standard Oil said he was a
good at soundbite Samuel Gompers said
quote the one thing that the world would
gratefully accept for mr. Rockefeller
now would be the establishment to be
great endowment of research and
education to help other people see in
time how they can keep from being like
him and then there were other people who
said leave aside the fact that he might
have done all kinds of harm in creating
the fortune he had for those of you who
have read on your devices book winners
take all the elites trade of changing
the world this is basically his line of
criticism the you know line he often
gives us that the harms done by
marketplace daylight can't be undone by
the goods done by philanthropic
moonlight we have to inquire into the
legitimacy of the money you make in the
first place there are other people who
said leave aside that give the benefit
of the doubt to the Rockefeller and his
advisers to say that they're well
intended but there was another in other
passage in which a sitting u.s. senator
said we should not authorize the
creation of the Rockefeller Foundation
because it's repugnant to the whole idea
of democracy you would think why is it
repugnant and the answer to that is it's
virtually by definition a plutocratic
voice or a plutocratic element in a
democratic setting so by definition it's
only a wealthy person that can create a
large foundation if the idea of the
foundation is to direct private assets
for some public benefit or as you
document in dark money not merely for a
general public benefit but to change
public policy which is in fact the
self-avowed goal of many large
philanthropists you're essentially
saying to wealthy people here's an
unaccountable basically non transparent
donor directed and tax advantaged
corporate entity for wealthy people to
have a greater say in the public sphere
and why in a setting in which we pry
the political quality of all citizens
would that be thought to be a welcome
thing and that's the source of the
criticism of Rockefeller and so you know
at a bare minimum one of the things that
I hope you know my book might contribute
to is a shift in the attitude to big
donors from automatic celebration and
gratitude to much more scrutiny so that
the power that a plutocrat wields serves
rather than subverts democratic
institutions so how did the I think one
of the things that that you argue that
makes this kind of philanthropy so
controversial is that it's tax
subsidized basically because it's tax
deductible all taxpayers are subsidizing
the donor how did that ever come about
because it seemed like it was right
around the same time that income taxes
were invented yeah yeah the two the two
go together and so was one a deal for
the other in a certain way it was I mean
so Rockefeller and Carnegie gave their
money away to their foundations without
any tax incentive to do so and one of
things I point out in the book is that
if you think the tax incentives are a
necessary part of philanthropy you know
if we get rid of the tax deductions
people will stop giving money away well
think about Alexis de Tocqueville the
most famous visitors the United States
who champions you know this this country
is a nation of joiners we do for
ourselves we're in other places people
look to government all this happened
this nation of joining stuff in
Rockefeller and Carnegie without any tax
incentive for giving and so the tax
deduction came about when the personal
income tax was created in 1917 which was
put in place to fund the war and the
worry was having a bunch of rich people
set up these large foundations now
they'll have a income tax levied on them
and that they'll pay their taxes instead
of giving to charity so there was an
initial carve out that they wouldn't
they wouldn't tax their charitable
contributions but at that time there was
no 501c3 sector there was no definition
of what counted as a public charity it
was really a very small thing and then
layered over time through lots of
different past acts in Congress with
very little you know rational
to tell about it the 501c3 sector in the
United Sates became this all things goes
anything goes sector and the incentives
to give got written into law and much
more significant ways than only applying
to these millionaires who set up
foundations I mean there seems to be an
aspect of it that's a--that's a tax
avoidance scheme for for some people I
mean it certainly was true of some of
the major funders of the right you know
they they put it into their would they
met with their tax lawyers and figured
out ways that they could fund their
political causes right this way but I
you know I I guess when you criticize it
people say well then we won't you know
the red cross won't get any more money
and that this is it would be tragic if
there was not that that you know that
tax advantage so what do you say to your
critics about that yeah it's not a
popular position no it's definitely not
a popular position
well I'd say a couple things so first of
all I already said namely that we have a
bunch of examples historically in fact
decades and decades of American
charitable behavior that existed without
any tax incentives so we can point to
long stretches of American history prior
to the introduction of the tax deduction
in which people in America were
evidently quite charitable second I'd
point out that when you do surveys of
people who give they often say that
charity or you know giving philanthropic
lis is a kind of personal virtue or it's
an obligation you undertake religiously
and they're not tax optimizing in giving
to the sundae basket at church which is
a tax-deductible gift in United States
they're doing what seems like a
religious obligation or they're doing
something like giving to the Red Cross
which is just a good thing to do now the
evidence does show an empirical question
not a philosophical question that
certain types of recipients basically
selectively higher education the sort of
institution I worked at work at at
Stanford and cultural institutions like
museums and operas people are engaging
in some tax optimization quite
frequently there so if we got rid of the
tax deduction altogether it's likely
that some give
to those types of institutions would go
down giving to religion I would predict
would be effectively unchanged the tax
incentive for giving to religious
institution is a public subsidy that's a
clap on the back for doing what you
would do anyway and you might wonder
whether if giving went down marginally
to places like Stanford or Harvard or
the Metropolitan Museum of Art
well people still retain the Liberty to
give to them so if you want to do it
entirely on your own dime by all means
go ahead but why should many people
think their whole country subsidize
giving to something that is either
extremely well-endowed already a place
like a university that I work at or a
place where it's unclear what the real
general public benefit is sure arts are
important but relative to the soup
kitchen and a whole bunch of other
things like the Red Cross shouldn't the
tax incentive really be working there
rather than this all all things you know
all considered or everything goes sector
as it now stands
so have you I mean when you think of
giving to philanthropy you think of it
as kind of redistributed basically up
it's an optional way to decide this is a
problem I want to solve and it's usually
you think of it as helping the poor or
or as you say sometimes a cultural
institution but but is it yeah it seems
like in your book you you're arguing
that it's not redistributed that was the
subset right yeah that was the surprise
to me is I I really did go into the
research in this book thinking as I'm
guessing at least some of you do maybe
if you work in the nonprofit sector
you're aware of this already but I
wasn't that the vast majority of giving
in the United States does not go for
almsgiving poverty fighting disadvantage
combating purposes and so there's some
studies I quote in the book that show
two things which are surprising so first
of all if you make maximally generous
assumptions that need be given to places
like Stanford you could give for
financial aid purposes and that should
be counted as assistance to the
disadvantaged or you know same to the
museum you allows the kids from the
inner city school to go to the museum to
get so if you if you maximize the
assumptions about what percentage of
giving to
places counts in the poverty relief exam
you know category at most 30% of all
giving United States is in that
direction and the thing that's even more
surprising was surprising to me is that
the higher income you are so the
wealthier you are the less likely you
are to give to poverty relieving
organizations so the poorer you are the
more frequently people champion giving
to soup kitchens in those kinds of
places the wealthier you are the more
frequently you give to higher education
and cultural institutions and the last
thing here is that the tax incentive the
tax advantages that go to philanthropy
massively advantaged wealthy people as
opposed to middle class and poor people
as a mathematical function of what a
deduction is so the the higher your
progressive tax rate the greater your
subsidy rate for giving so our public
policy mechanism for stimulating
charitable giving is written with the
plutocratic bias it massively advantages
the already wealthy in amplifying their
already considerable voices and last
thing if we thought that the preferences
of wealthy people in their giving mapped
on to the preferences of all people
maybe that wouldn't be an issue but in
point of fact the preferences of wealthy
people look like some of the people that
you covered in dark money they're
looking to affect public policy in
relatively narrow ways or to support
their alma mater or cultural
institutions which are hard to construe
as these general you know strict public
goods that all people can benefit from
so is there any policing of this
particular part of the the American
economy I mean it's a pretty big chunk
of change you're talking about you had
it I think 800 billion dollars is is is
in the four hundred and ten billion
dollars given away last year the United
States and what was the eight hundred
billion is that 600 yeah the total
amount of assets that are existing in
foundations is in the neighborhood of a
huge amount of money so who I mean is
this all supposed to be overseen by the
IRS and are they supposed to decide that
whatever it's going to is not political
is that right well of course there's a
big
controversy of the past couple years
about this sort of thing in the IRS this
- there's two agencies tasked with as it
were policing or monitoring the
nonprofit sector including foundations
the first is the IRS and that's the
initial stage of being approved by the
RS to be a 501 C 3 public charity or a
private foundation and I did some
research on this and I was shocked to
find so you know wanders a little bit
every year but almost every year that's
between 60,000 and 80,000 newly created
501 C 3 nonprofits and if you drop out
of the calculus applications that
weren't completely filled out that you
know didn't actually get a final
judgment by the IRS the IRS approves
over 99% of applications to become a 501
C 3 non-profit so there's effectively no
policing of charitable purposes by the
IRS the other entity charged with
monitoring our state Attorneys General
so they exist chiefly to look for the
most rampant corruption and abuse cases
you know paying the CEO of the nonprofit
1.5 million dollars staff costs amount
to 95 percent of the budget or you know
there's like self dealing going on
between someone on the board and what
the charity does in those relatively
rare cases state attorneys general might
get involved but for your
run-of-the-mill ordinary nonprofit
organization or private foundation
there's effectively no oversight now I
will say we're leaving out one important
source of oversight and that's your line
of work journalists can be incredibly
important to this entire enterprise
that's another place where it seems to
be a lack of oversight because the
number of journalists who are you know
have a philanthropy beat is in any major
newspaper or magazine I think basically
zero there's a chronicle of philanthropy
which is published here in DC I met with
some of the people there today it's one
of the few standing outlets that covers
the sector I hope and want them to do
way more investigative work than they
have done all they've done more than
most places and I think that journalists
have to play the conventional role of
holding power to account and fill in
threat
big philanthropy especially is a form of
power and having more people do stuff
like you had to go through to cover the
Koch brothers and other right-wing
funders would be great for examining
American plan to be well part of the
problem is there's not much transparency
as you as you point out in the in in
your book these are kind of
unaccountable organizations right
sometimes are are by statute go on in
perpetuity right without any kind of you
know public oversight in a particular so
it makes it hard I guess I wonder about
something that I don't think you do
address it in the book but don't these
philanthropies also serve a purpose of
kind of whitewashing the reputation of
of the the vastly wealthy people who
give the money away and they look so
tremendously generous then I wonder what
would they look like if they weren't
able to give this money way and take a
taxi yeah I think I think you're right
the best example you know today is this
the Sackler family now coming all under
all of this scrutiny for having funded
various parts of the opioid crisis and
apparently based on the lawsuit and this
material I've just been reading about in
the paper part of the Sackler family
themselves through the pharmaceutical
company that produces the drugs actually
deliberately pursuing maximal profit
even in the face of evidence about the
harms that were occurring and of course
the Sackler czar major donors as the
cokes are as well and they are the
Sackler is much more in a sort of
cultural dissenters I think the Sackler
museum here is a not the direct it's a
brother of the person that made the
greatest profit from oxycontin but in in
in Boston there's this cycling that
museums it's from that yeah I mean so
this is an old question in philanthropy
in certain ways so if you work in the in
the foundation sector you know the non
I'm not sure who who said this first but
the blind amongst anyone who raises
money is the problem with tainted money
is that taint enough of it
and some people take that line that if
you can repurpose even ill-begotten
gains for some obviously good end that
somehow redeems the the initial problem
but as you point out you're then
participating in the reputation
laundering of the individuals who are
doing the philanthropy I mean the
philosopher me wants to say this is
basically something like if I were to
steal your watch and then sell it at a
pawn shop and take the proceeds and give
it to the most effective charity that
there is you would have no reason to
excuse me for having stolen the watch in
the first place and I would owe repair
to you even if I had given it away for
some effective purpose and if there's an
initial you know crime that's committed
then whatever good you do with it
there's no way undoes the initial
problem well with now that we're sort of
entering a new Gilded Age to some extent
when you look at the the concentration
of wealth and the new fortunes being
made out in your part of the country in
Silicon Valley do you think this issue
is is entering you know anything like a
crisis point or at least more I hate use
the word crisis when you've got Trump
talking about the crisis on the border
okay so I don't want to I don't want to
like hype this right but is it is it
reaching a point of greater importance
to the country and significance and a
point where you think the people and
empower gonna take a look at it or
should yeah well I'd love to see at some
point you know a kind of commission
that's formed whether it's through
Congress or you know appointed by a
state or even the federal government
that kind of explores the phenomenon a
big philanthropy and it's whether the
policies we have that we allow
perpetuity that there are these tax
advantages that you can do as you say in
your book your report your book
basically weaponized philanthropy call
yourself a donor and yet do very naked
political giving as a philanthropist
these seem to me to be problems from the
standpoint of what would count as
healthy democracy I don't think
quite at the point where this is likely
to happen but I would love to see at the
minimum way more scrutiny so I mean in
certain respects here's the thought that
I would offer you as a stimulus to this
later point which would be in the second
Gilded Age I think we live in a moment
in which the wealthiest people amongst
us are taking most of the economic gains
relative to the rest of the population
they are trying everything they can do
to diminish their tax burden legally
speaking as close to zero as they can
get it having withdrawn from their
contribution as a citizen to the IRS or
the public sector they complain about
the dysfunction and ineffectiveness of
government and then they declare
themselves a philanthropist taking a
further tax advantage in setting up a
private foundation they themselves
direct the distribution of various
public benefits to people and in return
for the entire sequence ask the citizens
to bend over in gratitude to them for
the actions that they've undertaken in
the Gilded Age the power that people
have in the marketplace is already
significant as anyone who looks at
political giving knows and then if we
compound that power by offering nothing
but celebration of our biggest donors so
that the philanthropic power they they
wield is completely unchecked well we
live in an age of plutocracy I'm not an
age of democracy so at some point as
happen in the first Gilded Age there was
a progressive revolt and a whole across
a whole variety of fronts including
philanthropically maybe we're headed in
that direction but I'd say it's too
early to say with that with any
confidence to just play devil's advocate
I guess there are some philanthropies
probably that you think are developments
in philanthropy that are really good
where where private foundations are
trying things that are just not being
funded elsewhere in this society and as
a journalist I noticed there are a
number of sort of charitable
organizations now that are our NGOs that
are running journalism operations yeah
would would you think that's a bad thing
or a good thing yeah I
hoping to talk with the top to talk
tonight about this in part because it
gets a chance to speak with you about
some curious within your view so my book
is not only a critique there's a
framework that's meant to try to provide
an analysis of what would be a welcome a
set of activities from the standpoint of
philanthropy welcome from the standpoint
of democracy and what types of public
policies they would need to be to help
Shepherd it in that direction and when
it comes to big donors and big
foundations part of what I suggest in
the book is that you know large
foundations have a chance to try to do
things that aren't likely to happen in
the marketplace with firms and aren't
likely to happen in public agencies of a
democratic government both of which the
marketplace and democracy are beset by
relatively short time horizons your
investors will not give you a long leash
if you don't show any return and in a
public agency unless you show some
benefit through public spending the
person responsible for standing election
the next time around is not likely to be
reelected so what foundations can do or
what big donors can do is to take
advantage of this analysis of the basic
political economy across the board and
and think in a longer time horizon sense
about where there are things that aren't
going well in the marketplace and aren't
going well in government and at the
moment journalism happens to be one such
place so the business model the
for-profit model of journalism is under
threat naver's has basically gone up in
smoke for most places and there's deep
resistance for all kinds of reasons to
having journalism funded by the
government itself
so perhaps philanthropy can come in here
and here I'm gonna turn the question
back to you so the New Yorker is not
funded philanthropically to the best of
my knowledge Conde Nast is an ordinary
for-profit company not true it's a
for-profit yeah it's owned by the the
new large by the new Houseman yeah
that's right so for private companies
that's the old model relatively rare
these days but then the Atlantic Monthly
purchased by Laurene Powell Jobs an LLC
but in a philanthropic model Jeff Bezos
escortin he's not running the Washington
Post as a nonprofit but he's basically a
philanthropic patron of it you have Pro
Publica funded by nonprofits you've got
the LA Times purchased by a billionaire
basically the Beezus model we go on and
on there's a bunch of basically
philanthropic experiments underway to
underwrite journalism and so I don't
know you work in the sectors I first I
think also Laurene Powell Jobs once the
Atlantic to become a profitable
investment not know I don't think she's
going into it for as a charity I mean
she's doing it she's I think for public
purposes but also has the goal of having
it eventually make money from whatever
understand
I'm little leery of it I just I don't
think that I mean I think the the thing
is what's the alternative most of us who
work in journalism have been owned by
one wealthy family or another whether
it's the salts burgers or the new houses
or right it's not as if we're we're you
know I mean so so the problem is that in
philanthropy you it's people who've
given that much money away usually have
some interest in some policy right that
they are they want to push or their be
sacred cows that they don't want to have
gored and you're gonna bump into it
someplace along the way I think you know
and III think Laurene Powell Jobs been
very interested in sort of charter
schools and experiments with with public
education I just don't know how she
would feel about a scathing critique of
that but that you know and and I have to
say even though I've worked at The New
Yorker for almost 25 years I have and
I'm sure I've stepped on toes of owners
I've never heard a single complaint on
that had to do with you know crossing
somebody's private interests or an
advertiser job so there's there's an
ethic about it sure but the you know
there's two forms of influence here to
be worried about think back to I think
it was last summer this little tempest
in a teapot scandal about the New
America Foundation here in DC and the
Google gives to it where some unit
within New America was promoting a kind
of antitrust approach to the large tech
companies and were funded by Eric
Schmidt funded by Eric Schmidt and so
the worry you know from the standpoint
you know from someone like me is
not just that there's the risk of the
donor saying we don't want you to cover
this story or we're not going to fund
you in the future if you continue to
support this unit but just that the
thought would arise in the head of
anne-marie slaughter that she could
potentially piss off a major donor if
they were to do it that itself is a form
of influence independent of whether or
not Eriksson ever exercises that
influence yeah absolutely I don't think
it's an ideal kind of situation I mean
do you actually think there should be a
cap on the tax deduction yeah in the
book I propose we should get rid of tax
deduction entirely and replace it with a
tax credit that would treat all donors
identically so the mechanism would be
instead of offering anybody a deduction
for their giving every single citizen
gets call it a thousand-dollar flat
capped tax credit so you know 50% of any
gift you make is forgiven in a credit
style and so when Bill Gates gives away
his money he gets effectively $1,000 tax
write-off when you or I give away money
we also get the same thousand dollar tax
write-off the mechanism treats every
citizen equally all of our voices are
promoted from the standpoint of the
public policy and identical ways and
then afterwards if people want to
continue giving money away they can but
it's literally on their dime at that
point it would be a tax increase on the
the biggest donors especially if you
didn't have a tax burden and if wealthy
people were in that respect subsidizing
you to have $1,000 repurpose able tax
credit that would be a redistributed
form of charitable giving and I'm in
favor of that too so maybe we should
take some questions from people I see
one over here was for questions let's
try to speak into the mic so all Blake
just run around and anything you want to
say who you are that would be great hi
I'm a fundraiser actually some very
interested in all this but I think you
mentioned briefly the idea that by the
tax deduction bleeds coffers dry then
allows wealthy people to complain about
the effectiveness of government yeah um
I'm wonder if you could elaborate that
and a little bit more as a political
scientist about how the proliferation of
the non profit economy especially for
direct service for good
to the poor for for education what not
lead sort of actually not just money but
confidence and in public institutions
and in collective solutions rather than
kind of a Private Eye privatized
almsgiving as you were mentioning before
right okay so the question has to do
with about whether or not a set of
nonprofit organizations that are the
frontline of service delivery social
services also poses a worry about
confidence and government and you know
criticisms about the effectiveness of
the state so we imagine here something
that likely is you know will be a
sympathetic thought for most people if
we could only outsource to a nonprofit
organization the DMV experience surely a
privatized effort there would improve
upon the generally miserable experience
people have with the Department of Motor
Vehicles that's the basic idea and when
that happens across the board I think I
have two worries about that so first of
all I don't have any sort of principled
objection to the idea that some social
services can be appropriately and
legitimately provided by nonprofit
organizations deeper worries about
whether or not for-profit prison
provision for example is a problem but
if it's to a nonprofit organization I
don't have any bright-line principle to
stand on I think it's potentially quite
good for nonprofits to be the deliverers
of public services but they have to have
an accountability structure but just
back to the citizens and taxpayers and
of course the beneficiaries rather than
a form of unaccountability that often
happens in comparison to the kinds of
accountability that attach to public
agencies or can attach to public
agencies that's worry number one the
second is that if there's a devolution
of the provision of public services from
public agencies to private nonprofit
agencies then I think there is a likely
effect of diminishing confidence in the
ability of government to provide those
services and that has itself long stream
potential negative effects that you know
leads to the situation we're in in many
respects today with record low degree of
trust and confidence in the federal
government in particular you know just
the parenthetically here this is why I
think one of the reasons I think that
there's
much greater confidence among citizens
in local government and even in state
government than there is here in in the
federal government because people
actually see the delivery of public
services from their local locality often
times from their state and they're more
often not frustrated in the polarized
era we live in makes them just trust the
federal government in a way that's not
quite the same for other governments I
professor Nick burns I was at one of
your talks at Stanford last year and I
read the book and I enjoyed it very much
as you've described tonight you among
other things you know sort of suggest
that we get rid of the tax deduction by
applying sort of the principle of
equality other things but you know and
so I I suppose my question is is you
know relates to the possible effects of
getting rid of that donation as you
mentioned on this country's private
universities which are the best arguably
in the world yeah you know I I you know
I think obviously that the principle of
equality is one of the bedrock
principles of this country but yes I
wonder to an extent you know about it's
sort of possibility of being wielded as
a hatchet you know when one can one
could be too much like Rob's beer and
not enough like to go huh you know I
think it's it's harder to build it's
hard to build institutions like yeah our
fine private university system which may
be to a degree aristocratic but I think
to a degree that Tocqueville and I think
the founders would be happy abortive oh
yeah good I have a couple thoughts for
you so then I've said enough so first
you know the question is about whether
changes in public policy and calling
attention to various issues of equality
would diminish the likelihood that
people will give to private university
is like the one I work at very
well-endowed
and as I said before I think it if
you've got rid of the deduction entirely
would I would predict that there would
be smaller giving so first you know if
you're wondering is this guy up here who
teaches the Stanford University and is
you know basically funded by the very
philanthropy he's now criticizing so in
certain respects I am biting the hand
that feeds me I have a story to tell
about tenure that would be a convenient
one to tell however I have a kind of you
know redemptive thing to say which you
should hear with the grain of salt that
it would be exactly what you might
expect the guy who teaches at tenure at
this point to say in praise of
philanthropy and this is to go some way
to meeting your challenge of the
question the general point of view is
this that I think that too much of the
public debate about higher education and
selective higher education at places
like all these elite institutions with
tons of money and endowment focuses on
the cost of undergraduate education and
the bill that goes to the students and
the families who attend
and as anyone knows if they spent time
in an elite institution a research
university has as a second or third
mission teaching undergraduates and the
main mission is the research and I wish
that universities were much better at
calling attention to the public good of
basic research that happens chiefly in
elite universities not alone but that's
where some of the very best minds and
scholars in the world are so that if you
gave philanthropic lead to a place like
Stanford despite having 25 billion
dollars in the endowment and you gave a
lot of money not a $25 contribution to
your alumni fund but a hundred million
contribution to set up a new way of
doing engineering and artificial
intelligence or ethics to put it in a
completely self-interested way maybe
that over the long run would have huge
benefits so this is this main site in
the world where discoveries and basic
science happen
those are huge benefits to all people
and if philanthropy can be a piece of
funding that in addition to public funds
I want that to happen so last the
anecdote about this many of you if you
pay attention this are probably familiar
with Malcolm Gladwell's podcast in which
he's investigated all the
that goes to places like Stanford he's
hugely sarcastic and critical about it
he interviewed the former president of
Stanford a couple years ago John
Hennessy it seemed to me that Gladwell
got the better of that exchange
however as has been pointed out Malcolm
Gladwell's entire career as a journalist
at The New Yorker is on the backs of the
research produced by psychologists and
sociologists which if funding went away
it was only the local Community College
that got philanthropic donations he
would no longer have the stream of
research to read and to make his career
arrive so that's the thing to keep in
mind and that's what I think higher ed
needs to be much better at communicating
so that other people see the value of
the research Enterprise alongside the
educational mission I think also wasn't
what Malcom Gladwell was writing that
was that they that I think was Yale was
paying more out to the people managing
its endowment than it was using that
endowment to pay for scholarships for
students yeah or it was unseemly
littering Harvard is a hedge fund with
this little school attached on the side
exactly my name is Emily dime so my
question would be it's sort of about the
pluralism argument that you try to
dispute what would you say to people
right now who are using philanthropy as
a means to sort of object to giving this
administration funding in the form of
taxes in the form of taxes right so like
through getting a big deduction so the
idea is I as a citizen have deep
objections to the current president and
Congress or my elected representative
and rather than duly pay my tax bill
which funds the malevolent or or you
know ineffective activity of the
administration I do everything I can to
escape taxation because it would mean
I'd be much better off doing something
else with it especially where charitable
is that the basic idea yeah
well I can see why the thought enters
any person's head to be sure but I think
it's a devil's bargain in the long run
because if that's a standing thought
than someone with the opposing
preferences that you have now returns in
ten years when we have a switch in the
administration then we have a standing
opposition to sending tax contributions
and what our TAS decisions should be is
to duke it out politically and you know
have a level playing field as it were to
do that not the dark money type of
playing field that actually exists and
then to champion our preferred policies
the ordinary democratic process rather
than attempting with withdraw from it
and erect ourselves as philanthropists
to correct it if we want to hold any
stock in the long time operation of
democracy as such we can't absent
ourself from the enterprise and declare
ourselves as wiser than the democratic
process itself even if in any particular
moment that might likely be a correct
judgment not to mention the fact that
it's a tax deduction right so it's a
modest reduction in what you pay yeah
right so that's right so the point was
it's not a tax deduction it doesn't
cancel what you've given so when you
make a contribution it's still some of
it's coming out of your own back pocket
but as I pointed out earlier the
perversity in my view of the deduction
as a mechanism as opposed to the tax
credit but a deduction gives a
systematically greater benefit to the to
wealthy people so the higher up the
income scale you are the higher your
progressive tax bracket the greater your
subsidy rate the you know the line I use
in the book is that the wealthier you
are the cheaper it is for you to be
virtuous that's a problem in my view
yeah thank you for your interesting
thoughts and I'm not from America I'm
from the Caribbean my name is Gregory
Gilbert gums and what I want to ask is
because most of the conversation was
obviously about United States and the
issues dealing with the United States
you know philanthropy is a epiphenomenon
of a deregulated
class ridden society at this point in
time with all the contradictions in it
but the problem that from my part of all
you have is that some of these fill in
tropical organizations are starting to
have foreign policy yeah in my part of
the world right
with very little influence of the people
in those parts of the world and what
these organizations are doing right
unless in essence basically a form of
French rapid colonialism at this point
in time right till the tropic
imperialism so what are you I'm
wondering is did you say anything about
this in your book and did you think one
of my desperate attempts to democratize
is potentially giving towards people in
there you know I'm from the Caribbean by
the Africa would be um example the Bill
Gates Foundation that does a lot
obviously in health and different things
right and it's some of it you know
because nothing is being given is quite
important see I have to say something to
you one of the big issues that you have
in the third world in many parts of
Africa right is that a government has
pulled itself back from a lot of social
issues education health care stuff like
that this has gone to nonprofits right
and the government just spends money you
know I'm the dictator so yeah all the
money goes to keep me in power yeah so
one of my ideas would be you know wonder
what you think about it for example Bill
Gates Foundation to have some type of
the issue is how you set this up and how
you do it in ways that don't corrupt the
people who would be part of it set up a
filling tropical Parliament where if
you're doing education if you do any
health care if you're doing development
policies and Africa Caribbean Central
and Latin America yeah that not Bill
Gates and his wife decide you have to do
whatever they want
to do but their ideas they run by the
people who are going to be impacted in
extreme fair because these people are
quite poor people yeah
again I don't come from them I don't
come from particular poor party to care
I got from San Martin but but the
example what your president called a
shithole country right which is an
outrage to me but what do you think way
is that excellent yeah that's if you
have some idea sure I've got a couple of
thoughts about it so the first is to say
I mean I've given a lot of thought about
this I there was an initial chapter of
the book that was going to address
giving that's going overseas because it
raises a set of very different questions
than giving that's done domestically
within a democratic society but the
framework of the book is really to
analyze from the standpoint of
democratic institutions how ought we
consider the public policy structure for
Flenory but of course you're right
especially large foundations people want
to give overseas sometimes they give
within other democratic settings
sometimes they give to non democratic
settings and sometimes they give to
either democratic or non democratic
settings but where the government is
deeply dysfunctional and deeply corrupt
so in many respects I consider it a you
know a standing obligation of a big
donor the Gates Foundation is just the
easiest target here they have a large
overseas Giving Program in global health
to consider this very problem that
you're identifying you called it
imperialism that one I would point to is
does the giving of the Gates Foundation
in an overseas context somehow
contribute to the building of a public
infrastructure especially one that would
be ideally democratically accountable
rather than accountable to an
authoritarian regime that allows
eventually the Gates Foundation of a
notion foundation to withdraw leaving
the public infrastructure better off
than what it was when it initially
showed up on the scene now whether a
philanthropic parliament or a group is
the right way to go I don't I don't know
enough about exactly what the detail I
mean one of this other things I'll say
here that stands true it seems to me
about domestic plan to be and overseas
philanthropy is that anyone who's worked
in a non-profit organization then cross
the street to become a grant maker
especially if you're the initial donor
you know goes overnight and becomes the
smartest and best looking and funniest
person in the room and it's very
difficult to get honest
feedback from your grantees and the
beneficiaries in some cases you don't
even bother looking for it even if you
wanted it so there's a standing problem
being a donor of getting systemic
feedback in an honest way from the
people you're intending to help and
that's all the more important to do that
in an international circumstance because
you're interacting with the
infrastructure that is there where
you're not a citizen you're not a party
to that process and that raises an
important dimension to consider thanks
for the talk I'm Alex Daniels from The
Chronicle of philanthropy and I
appreciated your discussion of on the
political cycles or the quarterly market
cycle and then philanthropies kind of
longer time horizon and I'm wondering
what you think about foundations that
operate in perpetuity with this
commission on philanthropy you envision
kind of address that issue yeah yeah
well I'm in favor of foundations or
philanthropy operating on longer time
horizons in the marketplace for them
government perpetuity is an especially
long time horizon I'm opposed at
perpetuity so you know one of the
movements a voluntary one these days
that large foundations are set up with
the aspiration to spend out either
within the life of the donor or you know
a generation after the principle donors
and pass away I think you know we're not
gonna get an answer here that derived
from philosophical principle but you
know call it 20 years after the initial
donors pass away is a sufficiently long
time horizon to operate on and after
that I mean among the worries about
perpetuity there are several but the
chief one from my point of view is when
we both legally protect the donors
wishes after their death we're setting
up a circumstance in which philanthropic
assets are legally harnessed to whatever
the idiosyncratic purposes of the
initial donor now if you have a big
broad general mission that allows future
grant makers to interpret it differently
but most places don't have a big broad
general mission they have relatively
narrow missions so you know the line not
my own but comes from this you know tax
law universe the dead hand of the donor
reaches out of the grave to strangle the
Preferences of all current generations
what would make anyone think however
wise they are that you can successfully
predict circumstances a hundred years
from now so that your philanthropic
cause will be just as important than
beneficial and as effective 100 years
from now in social circumstances that
you have no way of adequately imagining
so that you'd want perpetuity to be the
time horizon of your foundation so I
would get rid of perpetuity if if I were
a philosophical King asked to rewrite
the policy structure hi Rob Pony Kepler
Mueller um would your commission look at
publishing standard metrics of outcomes
so if I'm looking at with my tax money
and I have a cause and then I could say
here are five that I'm interested in but
this one this is really changing this
you know little kids lives more and so
I'm gonna go there yes we don't have
enough of that right now I don't think
right to you that's right yeah it's a
question has to do with measuring the
outcomes of charity or philanthropy and
how to make those transparent and maybe
begin to get you know better giving on
the basis of these outcomes so the one
hand I'm completely in favor of there
being much more rigorous analysis based
upon some accepted outcome measures and
sort of full disclosure this is
disclosed in the book I'm on the board
of giveWell which is an organization
that rates the effectiveness of
charitable giving and and it identifies
exceptionally good investment
opportunities for your charitable giving
where the return on charitable donations
is especially high in human welfare
terms now having said that I'm wanting
to call attention to this work I also
would think that it's important to say
at the same time that whereas in the
financial markets we all agree what
maximizing return on investment looks
like no one across the sector has any
trouble identifying what the right
outcome is within the charitable sector
there are often multiple potential
outcomes so just say give well give well
is concerned with hue
welfare but one laudable form of charity
is to promote animal welfare and if you
only care about human welfare then no
animal welfare organization will ever
register on that outcome metric so
there's almost certainly going to be
plural metrics to take into account and
that makes any marketplace in giving
akin to the investment marketplace
way more complicated to imagine one more
wrap I know you know that I stand give
well yes this is Bridget she's on the
board of give well to my question is
there's a lot of policy problems but
just as a hypothetical
if everyone right now who are these
major philanthropists were using their
donations to fund give well or other
effective altruism type initiatives
would you still support these policy
changes yeah so if people were using
their philanthropic dollars travel
resources to fund give well recommended
charities which are have a high degree
of confidence in promoting really great
human welfare outcomes would I still
worry about these policy changes well so
say the obvious thing first it's you
know we're so far from a world in which
most people think about the
effectiveness of charity most people you
know to use the simple phrase give with
their heart not with their head most
wealth advisors when they meet a wealthy
person don't say let me show you some
give well analysis of these great
charitable recommendations to say tell
me your passion and then I'll help you
give you know some ideas um so there's
so much space in the world as it exists
now to have give well recommendations
have a greater place that said I am
myself not an effective philanthropist
effective altruist and I guess I should
say nothing I want to be an effective
philanthropist I don't want to be an
effective altruist even though on the
board of an organization that's devoted
to it because I think it would be a bad
outcome if a hundred percent of donors
were oriented this direction in part
because especially with
Wells case you've had conversations with
a get-well people about this this is a
particular form of giving that's
basically a political it doesn't take
into account whether or not longer time
horizon changes that create new
organizations rather than analyze
existing organizations might turn out to
be more effective in the long run than
just supporting things that already
exist so effective altruism in the
giveWell form is in certain respects
oddly a conservative status quo oriented
stance to the world it says let's not
imagine what could happen in ten years
if we were to fund something brand new
that's a low confidence project it says
let's know what we can get out of
charity tomorrow and next week and
that's great given how much philanthropy
is completely not guided by the head but
I would never want all philanthropy to
be like that so Rob I should we should
wrap it up but I've got one last
question for you too which is how do you
feel about organizations like donors
trust which are I guess they're called
donor advised funds right where the
donor gives money to another
organization so basically their
fingerprints are erased and the public
can't see where the money came from yeah
yeah so the donors trust this donor
advised funds and there's there's also
mean like we talked about Laurene Powell
Jobs Louie Powell Jobs doesn't have a
private foundation she has a limited
liability company the Emerson collective
like the Chan Zuckerberg initiative like
the open philanthropy project and like
the Emidio our network our LLC's they're
not Foundation so they are announced
this philanthropic aspirational entities
but they're basically for-profit
companies and the transparency
requirements that attach to them are
much lower I mean they're already low in
for foundations as you will end up with
secret spend secret spending so that's
my deep objection to those I think we
should have both much bigger payout
requirements or donor advised funds and
we should have greater transparency but
I'll I'll take an asterisk there and I
wonder if you agree or disagree with
this there is a long-standing tradition
partly motivated by religion but also
consecrated in the United States Supreme
Court decision to allow for anonymous
giving and I wouldn't want to make
illegal
anonymous giving as a whole I would want
for especially large donors to be
required especially if they have
political aspirations that should be
disclosed but you're the ordinary $50
gift to an organization even if for a
political purpose seems to me
permissibly done anonymously
it's where any particular person has a
large amount of power to build through
their wallet that requirements of
disclosure and heightened expectations
of transparency I think are important I
mean for me the issue becomes because
the lines have become so blurred between
philanthropy and politics that if you're
giving large donations that are
anonymous such as there's one to the
judicial crisis Network that we know is
something like twenty five million
dollars that went to picking Supreme
Court justices
I think the public's got a great
interest in knowing who's picking them
as paying absolutely and I you know so
until that line is better clarified by
better police that I'm kind of for more
transparency not less but anyway but but
that but that anyway this has been great
thank you so much for your expertise and
for joining thanks so much for coming
[Applause]
you